So tell me when you want me to start go for it.
The world in words is made possible in parts by the National Endowment for the
Humanities celebrating fifty years of
excellence
here
with Patrick Cox And you're listening to the world and well talk us about languages and the
people who today Patrick as you know we have a name tag
story name tags are occasional series on the stories behind place names.
Patrick before we get into the story actually have a little name tag quiz for us to try out
first and you should do pretty well this Patrick because it's a quiz concerning the pronunciation
of town names around Norfolk.
Oh yeah yeah no fuck I went to college in north of the University of East Anglia which gives
you a sense of the geography of it is that sort of that sticks out above
London into the North Sea. Yeah.
So we're talking North Folk England here and not virgin yeah OK so how this is going to work is
I'm going to spell out the town
name and you're just going to tell me how it's pronounced in North.
Yeah like how the north north. You know folk
humans would the people of North Dakota. He would know.
Would say this
name the any pronunciation I could do for people from North we would kind of
loss about the local accent.
It was just this one line you going down the pub. That's
it you go in down the path. It was kind of slow and then it
rose at the end of the like the back said this is the kind of local accent.
You know or yeah so that we would say that to each other for a bubbly on a nightly
basis is the just Anglian accent. Yeah maybe a specific knows that when I don't
know you go in down the
pub. OK I said you know. A piece of paper and a pen to write these
down show. OK I'm ready. OK The first
one it is spelled W Y
M O N D H A
M Oh yeah I know this place because we used to go to parties here in my
friend Reinhart's rotten red runaround Hans Roman red rhino. If you sat in
the passenger seat and got out of the door. That's why you took the door with you it
wasn't attached to the rest. So
you're driving around Norfolk in the rotten red red no.
Yes And and we would go to parties in this town Wyndham is how it's
pronounced being the new window when you're at
one point and I think I remember it specifically because I'm guessing anyway
because I've got the strong images of my knowledge from right. Otherwise I'm
afraid when I can't remember in any other
way to me it looks like women and ham. Yeah right think we must
we must look down through this for the first time we went then correct. OK So there
are so many good ones but I mean to give
you this next. OK OK. S T
I S S K
E Y and I hope everybody out there is also playing along. I asked
ask you why.
OK so it looks like it's pronounced this key but it clearly isn't
so what shall I say it's
lucky.
I'm leaving it's Stookey Stookey I really just get rid of
the
I.F.'s Stookey to get rid of the I asked. Yeah. So
it's like Stookey OK Let me let me see.
T A
C O L N E S T O
and so it's a village in south Norfolk T
A L. And he S T O
and oh my goodness. When you said a C.E.O.
talk. I don't like this but I was like
yeah but but they were very far from
anyplace making tacos and the calls. I don't even know how you
would pronounce it if you were just doing it in the standard English why such
angle nested talks than Truxton How about that.
Tackle stone.
Oh for goodness sake do you really
fast tackle nest and tackle so and tackle nest and tackle stone tackle stone.
OK final one. I'm one for three or one for three.
OK final one and you an
D.
S. L. e Y.. So again that's an un D E
S L E Y.
So so again Coastal is a sort of oh well it's quite possible I went there we went
to the comes quite a lot.
Mum does Lee Mundus Lee would be sort of an outsider's guess but
it clearly isn't otherwise it wouldn't have made your dusted Lee
live money monthly.
Oh my God ding ding day really totally got its monthly I think I'm getting
a pass on here but it. They just sort of drop some middle syllable or
two but you turn the ass into you which is very smart
monthly monthly I can figure out any of these these all come from an article by the way where
this news organization got. One of their foreign reporters to try and pronounce all of
these village names and he did it hardly wrong and it's
so funny AN Yway. So Patrick did you know there's actually
a term for this kind of study of
me I do know on I'm ology I
don't watch it. I'll stick
onomastics Yash is the president of the English Police me and
society is a group of academics. And regular folks who just nerd out about
names. In the names of towns and villages which haven't really changed for centuries. You
can read the whole history of the country it's it's really fascinating from that point of
view like the eighth and ninth century the period when the Vikings came to the British
Isles due to for self is a professor of Viking studies at the University of
Nottingham and she fell in love with the Nordic warriors and medieval
history as a teenager.
I'd read my talking a lot of fight evil to start out as sounds of talking.
I like that it all started with talk
and I can't stand them now but
nevertheless I'm not ashamed
to admit that that's kind of where I started off with fourteen year
old Judith went on to learn old Norse she studies runes
she also studies place
names you know I'm interested in all aspects of the Viking age and one of the most
important bits of evidence for Vikings in the British Isles
certainly is the really quite large number of Scandinavian
place names.
Oh so it's almost like we're back in Norfolk again or at least up and down
the Eastern English coast because that was where a load of those Viking
names stuck right. Write all of those names and be
why Mary Magdalene Yang Grimsby if Old Norse is the same
as modern Norwegian and Danish B Y means town.
And then there's also up in
Yorkshire the Yorkshire Dales which are sort of valleys the word
de L.D.L. means Valley and in Old Norse Well I
don't know already knew you know you have a shins of it so you
can see a lot of how the Vikings came to the British Isles through just the names of the towns that
stuck getting back to that nor folkways that I gave you and the
pronunciation of place names. There's another thing that I chatted. With Judith that was really
interesting and it was about
how actually pronunciation can influence the naming of a
place so we have a place here near noshing I'm called Fisker
Chian and it was originally a village of fishermen so should
the fish or
chicken but in the Old Norse language the word for fish is
Fisk and the word for a fisherman is fifth grade. So you get discouraged
but instead of fish which you know it's an English thing but it was pronounced by the Scandinavian encumbers
with their schedule maybe an accent. If you like and it's retained that pronunciation.
So fish written. Became Fisker to and because of the way some Vikings pronounced it
like centuries
ago. Well that's all. Some Yeah on the word Fisk today in Danish in the way
Jinn's they go. Which brings me to our story today so I
first started thinking about pronunciation and place names a few years ago when
I went to visit the small New Hampshire town. It's like way way up north in the
great northern woods near the Canadian
border it spelt B R L I N So
Patrick how do you think you would pronounce that.
Oh no this is another. Well I
would pronounce it the way the the well known for the capital of Germany is
printed right. But that's clearly wrong otherwise you wouldn't be asking me.
Lyn Berlin. No no. Totally wrong. While it is spelled like
the German capital. It's not pronounced Berlin it's pronounced Berlin. You
know and this is on the first syllable is a very very subtle Berlin not
Berland Berlin. I mean people will correct you up there. They will correct you will
they correct.
But when it's from Jim I suppose. I mean because they're not
in Berlin. They're in Berlin. So I would got curious about why this name
and why this pronunciation and so I called up
some experts. You can say Historical Society my legal speaking.
Hello always told me. In was actually originally named Maine's
borough A Y N E S
B R O U G H.
Maine's
borough in eight hundred twenty nine the town change his name to Berlin. As for the pronunciation.
Well you didn't know much.
And that's not something that I have any documentation on. I
mean Concord is pronounced differently than Concord. Yeah
it could just be a regional accent it's
well to get to the bottom of this. It seems that I needed to ask
real Berlin
or so we
did
OK is a question that I should
know but I don't know why they didn't do it Berlin in
Berlin and said I don't know it's so confusing and that Murtha hit bottom on main street in Berlin.
She's not
actually from there. She happens to be from the neighboring town
of Milan and I L A
and people call it. So I think maybe it's just this area that can't be pronounced.
I'm not sure
Berlin not a big place somewhere you know between a couple mountains behind you know a couple trees
behind a
boulder Berlin was once a bustling log and saw mill town the endless Goggin
river cuts through the heart of the town talking to folks on Main Street who seem to
be as many
theories as are Berliners I
mean Berliners I know around World War One there was a yeah chanted
German movement and things that were had German names
were changed. So I think Berland probably got
this
production at the time to kind
of attempt to diminish the Germanic.
Impression but I
don't know I'm going to say probably generating the
French you know because the French population here back in the day. Everybody's. You
know someone has a problem because of that it's why it's called What It
Is I guess it depends on where you're from and what your act is all about
the guy that. Like I used to live in Bangor a lot of people from out
of town called Bangor or really
Bangalore by Berlin I don't know I guess to know where you're
from there's one man in
town guaranteed to know the truth. I was
told by Maryland resident
historian Paul. Hi nice to me oh
yeah my girlfriends the
the
Paul has his own unique name booth. You can walk around Berlin
and ask people if they know Paul Todd if they don't know but if you ask if
they know Paul of course I know
Poff What's the story. What's the story as as you know it to
be fact when you want to know for a fact.
OK The Plautus I know about Brolin becoming barrel on
his drummer all is nothing.
Poof doesn't know.
So it's unknown whether you were named after the German town or if you were
named after another town in New England
or that's right it's on known and my research shows
that it's unknown poofs comb through archives and books. No
definitive evidence no smoking gun. There's just a little clue about
its pronunciation what I
found is that the Yankees that first came
here once they changed the name from Israel to Berlin their
pronunciation was on the first syllable. Burl and not on the
second syllable. OK I was a bit skeptical but then poof told me something
interesting there are actually four Berlin's in New England and all four of
them have the same pronunciation. Weird. I thought I just have to go to
another
one so I went just outside of Boston to Berlin
Massachusetts and there I met the poof Tardif of Berlin Massachusetts his name is a
Barry Yeager and he is the chairman of Berlin Massachusetts
Historical Society.
My family has been in those in Berlin since this time began the ancestors of mine that were
here at the time that the time was
incorporated in seventeen eighty four and seventy four the
Berlin mass was named in seventeen eighty four in the wake of the Revolutionary
War and in those raw few years after the war Yankees
did not want to name their new towns after the English.
It's likely that a German name was picked rather than English name because of
feelings toward Burton at that
time no German so that you know of in the area.
No there was never any significant German immigrant population here. It was
all Yankees that were here at the time. And so they Anglo size the
name
immediately.
Instead of the way it sounded most natural and you're just
pleased we have a deed in our historical collection from
the year seven hundred eighty
four that spells the name of the town be a R L
I N G. Officially it was spelled B E R L I N From the
beginning in the act of the legislature it was spelled the same as
the capital of Germany. However it was
not pronounced that way by the locals and because they didn't pronounce it that way.
It led to people writing it in the way that they were hearing it. And that's where that
misspelling in the date comes. So from the very beginning the local settlers
Angua
sized the word surlily and made it very well known violent from the
very
beginning.
So back in Berlin New Hampshire today. You're more likely to
hear the remnants of a French accent. Many of the town's residents are the descendants of
French speaking loggers who came to work the sawmills and log the great north
woods and you can actually see French history in some of the street names like the Black Sea
Air St sorry murder that pronunciation. But it roughly translates to
man of the woods French though unlike the theory that you heard earlier in
the story doesn't seem to have much to do with how the town
pronounces its German name.
Incidentally the town did briefly flirt with the idea of changing its name during
World War One according to poof
tardive eclipse the newspaper from February fourteenth Valentine's
Day one thousand nine hundred eighteen. I wonder if you might read this with the headline that I can.
This was from the Brawn reporter Brolan Hampshire Thursday February fourteenth ID an
eighteen a change was advocated by many Berlin citizens.
We do not object to the name Brolan but we do object to the horrors on
the frightfulness in its connection with the Imperial German government.
Let us respect the honor and man one of our boys in the trenches. What
do you say citizens of Berlin about a change what
is in a
name the town didn't change its name.
Not even temporarily in the end is going to be too much of a bureaucratic
nightmare and job or line. The main Berlin the
Franco American town with a German name and changing pronunciation.
Thank
you ma'am and I will have to
acknowledge let me give you I know it now for you.
He was really baby.
Johnny Rotten Tomatoes the
software that ate a cola belt
may be a cat that
she didn't like it was shipped back to I got it there
are all the fit to see it when
his teeth that he wanted
a GET HIS enough that he never came out
in Auschwitz show. Oh shit man again.
I wish you'd asked me how to pronounce Pluto. I would be most up on
it that's like the best nickname ever he actually gave me a whole story about how he
became
names. It was actually the nickname his dad who could tell stories about hunting and
when he would like shoot the gun you would go poof boop boop boop and so the
nicknamed of us will see you. Strictly speaking his post Jr He's tough to yeah he's
in his
junior puff piece I must admit when I first moved to New England I was
very confused. I think a lot of English people particularly confuse when they
go to New England because they see all these towns that they think they know how to
pronounce
and they're bit different like you know like about lemon but the towns in England for the
most part. And so it's really confusing to English people because suddenly you're confronted by
a different pronunciation sometimes slightly different spelling as
well so there's this Woburn right Matthew Ruben mass right.
Why is it pronounced Woo is a single Oh that. So should be like whoa burn should be
well been which is what the good name of the town. I believe the town in England is
pronounced
well but actually got corrected on Woburn when I first moved here I was like whoa Byrne. What
are you
talking in a town called
Welborn Reuben it's a Hebrew burn Do you really think that they should either have to sell the law or say
she lived. Yes.
W B U R N or Wu woo we know but
I'll tell you you remember and there was another one a little bit north of
Wilburn call Bill Rekha this one is totally with it so it's B I
L L T
I see a bill or echo bellow wrecker. But they got rid of the
either just that that just gets dropped from the pronunciation so they'd lose a syllable
Bill
Rekha but the town in England that they borrowed it from is Bill or Ricky.
So it's the same spelling with a Y at the end the Recchi in
Essex. Oh yeah. It actually should be a bill or a K. right because isn't
a Y.A.Y.. Although although I think I think the Brits pronounce
it below Ricky bill or Bill or Ricky. Yeah it's nice and in fact it's
so pleasant sounding that Ian Dury the singer he did a very
famous song called Bill Ricky
Dickie Good evenin. I'm from Essex police you couldn't
tell my Given I am is Jackie O. I come from below Ricky.
And all due in there
you
were
at the bank
court and if you can hear already it's
coming Saturday which is a nice place
directly as a kind of thing
I think you know I thought I just noticed the
stuff
in the air
you do you have an automatic process with a good name
tag sorry. Hala. You can tweet us at Lingle
tide or email us the address is. Language at P R
I thought this week we have a new accent quiz for you you heard up at
the top of the show take your wildest guess here you
know the world in words is made possible in part by the National Endowment for
the Humanities celebrating fifty years of
excellence and that's all for this week and this edition of
mean tag. Thanks. Now my
spelling
because we could have talked about lemons Yeah.
LEMON Lemon
Yeah.